"
Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID-19 resource centre with
free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID-
19. The COVID-19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect, the
company's public news and information website.
Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID-19-related
research that is available on the COVID-19 resource centre - including this
research content - immediately available in PubMed Central and other
publicly funded repositories, such as the WHO COVID database with rights
for unrestricted research re-use and analyses in any form or by any means
with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are
granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID-19 resource centre
remains active.
Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 139 (2020) 110057
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Chaos,  Solitons  and  Fractals Nonlinear Science, and Nonequilibrium and Complex Phenomena journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/chaos
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/chaos
A  SIR  model  assumption  for  the  spread  of  COVID-19  in  different communities
Ian Cooper a , Argha Mondal b , ∗, Chris G. Antonopoulos b
Ian Cooper a , Argha Mondal b , ∗, Chris G. Antonopoulos b a School of Physics, The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia b Department of Mathematical Sciences, University of Essex, Wivenhoe Park, UK
a School of Physics, The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia b Department of Mathematical Sciences, University of Essex, Wivenhoe Park, UK
a b s t r a c t
a b s t r a c t
a r t i c l e i n f o
In this paper, we study the effectiveness of the modelling approach on the pandemic due to the spreading of the novel COVID-19 disease and develop a susceptible-infected-removed (SIR) model that provides a theoretical framework to investigate its spread within a community. Here, the model is based upon the well-known susceptible-infected-removed (SIR) model with the difference that a total population is not defined or kept constant per se and the number of susceptible individuals does not decline monotonically. To the contrary, as we show herein, it can be increased in surge periods! In particular, we investigate the time evolution of different populations and monitor diverse significant parameters for the spread of the disease in various communities, represented by China, South Korea, India, Australia, USA, Italy and the state of Texas in the USA. The SIR model can provide us with insights and predictions of the spread of the virus in communities that the recorded data alone cannot. Our work shows the importance of modelling the spread of COVID-19 by the SIR model that we propose here, as it can help to assess the impact of the disease by offering valuable predictions. Our analysis takes into account data from January to June, 2020, the period that contains the data before and during the implementation of strict and control measures. We propose predictions on various parameters related to the spread of COVID-19 and on the number of susceptible, infected and removed populations until September 2020. By comparing the recorded data with the data from our modelling approaches, we deduce that the spread of COVID- 19 can be under control in all communities considered, if proper restrictions and strong policies are implemented to control the infection rates early from the spread of the disease. © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Article history: Received 18 June 2020 Accepted 23 June 2020 Available online 28 June 2020 Keywords: COVID-19 pandemic infectious disease virus spreading SIR model forecasting
1. Introduction
In December 2019, a novel strand of Coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) was identified in Wuhan, Hubei Province, China causing a severe and  potentially  fatal  respiratory  syndrome,  i.e.,  COVID-19.  Since then, it has become a pandemic declared by World Health Orga- nization (WHO) on March 11, which has spread around the globe [1–5] . WHO published in its website preliminary guidelines with public  health  care  for  the  countries  to  deal  with  the  pandemic [6] . Since then, the infectious disease has become a public health threat. Italy and USA are severely affected by COVID-19 [7–9] . Mil- lions of people are forced by national governments to stay in self- isolation and in difficult conditions. The disease is growing fast in many  countries  around  the  world.  In  the  absence  of  availability of a proper medicine or vaccine, currently social distancing, self- quarantine  and  wearing  a  face  mask  have  been  emerged  as  the
∗ Corresponding author. E-mail address: arghamondalb1@gmail.com (A. Mondal).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chaos.2020.110057 0960-0779/© 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
most  widely-used  strategy  for  the  mitigation  and  control  of  the pandemic. In this context, mathematical models are required to estimate disease transmission, recovery, deaths and other significant param- eters  separately  for  various  countries,  that  is  for  different,  spe- cific  regions  of  high  to  low  reported  cases  of  COVID-19.  Differ- ent countries have already taken precise and differentiated mea- sures that are important to control the spread of the disease. How- ever,  still now,  important factors  such  as population density, in- sufficient  evidence  for  different  sym ptoms,  transmission  mecha- nism and unavailability of a proper vaccine, makes it difficult to deal with such a highly infectious and deadly disease, especially in high population density countries such as India [10–12] . Recently, many research articles have adopted the modelling approach, using real incidence datasets from affected countries and, have investi- gated different characteristics as a function of various parameters of the outbreak and the effects of intervention strategies in differ- ent countries, respective to their current situations.
2 I. Cooper, A. Mondal and C.G. Antonopoulos / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 139 (2020) 110057
It  is  imperative  that  mathematical  models  are  developed  to provide  insights  and  make  predictions  about  the  pandemic,  to plan effective control strategies and policies [13–15] . Modelling ap- proaches [8,16–21] are helpful to understand and predict the pos- sibility and severity of the disease outbreak and, provide key in- formation  to  determine  the  intensity  of  COVID-19  disease  inter- vention. The susceptible-infected-removed (SIR) model and its ex- tended  modifications  [22–25] ,  such  as  the  extended-susceptible- infected-removed (eSIR) mathematical model in various forms have been  used  in  previous  studies  [26–28]  to  model  the  spread  of COVID-19 within communities. Here, we propose the use of a novel SIR model with different characteristics.  One  of  the  major  assumptions  of  the  classic  SIR model is that there is a homogeneous mixing of the infected and susceptible populations and that the total population is constant in time. In the classic SIR model, the susceptible population de- creases monotonically towards zero. However, these assumptions are not valid in the case of the spread of the COVID-19 virus, since new epicentres spring up around the globe at different times. To account for this, the SIR model that we propose here does not con- sider the total population and takes the susceptible population as a variable that can be adjusted at various times to account for new infected individuals spreading throughout a community, resulting in an increase in the susceptible population, i.e., to the so-called surges. The SIR model we introduce here is given by the same sim- ple system of three ordinary differential equations (ODEs) with the classic  SIR  model  and  can  be  used  to  gain  a  better  understand- ing of how the virus spreads within a community of variable pop- ulations in time, when surges occur. Importantly, it can be used to make predictions of the number of infections and deaths that may occur in the future and provide an estimate of the time scale for the duration of the virus within a community. It also provides us with insights on how we might lessen the impact of the virus, what is nearly impossible to discern from the recorded data alone! Consequently, our SIR model can provide a theoretical framework and  predictions  that  can  be  used  by  government  authorities  to control the spread of COVID-19. In our study, we used COVID-19 datasets from [29] in the form of time-series, spanning January to June, 2020. In particular, the time series are composed of three columns which represent the total cases I d tot , active cases I d and Deaths D d in time (rows). These datasets were used to update parameters of the SIR model to un- derstand the effects and estimate the trend of the disease in var- ious communities, represented by China, South Korea, India, Aus- tralia, USA, Italy and the state of Texas in the USA. This allowed us to estimate the development of COVID-19 spread in these com- munities by obtaining estimates for the number of deaths D , sus- ceptible S , infected I and removed R m populations in time. Conse- quently, we have been able to estimate its characteristics for these communities and assess the effectiveness of modelling the disease. The  paper  is  organised  as  following:  In  Sec.  2 ,  we  introduce the SIR model and discuss its various aspects. In Sec. 3 , we ex- plain  the  approach  we  used  to  study  the  data  in  [29]  and  in Sec. 4 , we present the results of our analysis for China, South Ko- rea, India, Australia, USA, Italy and the state of Texas in the USA. Section 5 discusses the implications of our study to the "flattening the curve" approach. Finally, in Sec. 6 , we conclude our work and discuss the outcomes of our analysis and its connection to the ev- idence that has been already collected on the spread of COVID-19 worldwide.
2. The SIR model that can accommodate surges in the susceptible population
The world around us is highly complicated. For example, how a virus spreads, including the novel strand of Coronavirus (SARS-
CoV-2) that was identified in Wuhan, Hubei Province, China, de- pends upon many factors, among which some of them are consid- ered by the classic SIR model, which is rather simplistic and cannot take into consideration surges in the number of susceptible indi- viduals. Here, we propose the use of a modified SIR model with characteristics, based upon the classic SIR model. In particular, one of the major assumptions of the classic SIR model is that there is a homogeneous mixing of the infected I and susceptible S popu- lations and that the total population N is constant in time. Also, in the SIR model, the susceptible population S decreases monoton- ically towards zero. These assumptions however are not valid in the case of the spread of the COVID-19 virus, since new epicen- tres spring up around the globe at different times. To account for this, we introduce here a SIR model that does not consider the to- tal population N , but rather, takes the susceptible population S as a variable that can be adjusted at various times to account for new infected individuals spreading throughout a community, resulting in its increase. Thus, our model is able to accommodate surges in the number of susceptible individuals in time, whenever these oc- cur and as evidenced by published data, such as those in [29] that we consider here. Our SIR model is given by the same, simple system of three or- dinary differential equations (ODEs) with the classic SIR model that can be easily implemented and used to gain a better understanding of how the COVID-19 virus spreads within communities of variable populations in time, including the possibility of surges in the sus- ceptible populations. Thus, the SIR model here is designed to re- move many of the complexities associated with the real-time evo- lution of the spread of the virus, in a way that is useful both quan- titatively and qualitatively. It is a dynamical system that is given by three coupled ODEs that describe the time evolution of the follow- ing three populations:
1. Susceptible individuals, S ( t ): These are those individuals who are not infected, however, could become infected. A susceptible in- dividual  may  become  infected  or  remain  susceptible.  As  the virus spreads from its source or new sources occur, more in- dividuals will become infected, thus the susceptible population will increase for a period of time (surge period). 2. Infected individuals, I ( t ): These are those individuals who have already been infected by the virus and can transmit it to those individuals who are susceptible. An infected individual may re- main infected, and can be removed from the infected popula- tion to recover or die. 3. Removed  individuals,  R m ( t ):  These  are  those  individuals  who have recovered from the virus and are assumed to be immune, R m ( t ) or have died, D ( t ).
Furthermore, it is assumed that the time scale of the SIR model is  short  enough  so  that  births  and  deaths  (other  than  deaths caused  by  the  virus)  can  be  neglected  and  that  the  number  of deaths from the virus is small compared with the living popula- tion. Based on these assumptions and concepts, the rates of change of the three populations are governed by the following system of ODEs, what constitutes the SIR model used in this study
I. Cooper, A. Mondal and C.G. Antonopoulos / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 139 (2020) 110057 3
It has been observed that in many communities, a spike in the number  of  infected  individuals,  I ,  may  occur,  which  results  in  a surge in the susceptible population, S , recorded in the COVID-19 datasets [29] , what amounts to a secondary wave of infections. To account for such a possibility, S in the SIR model (1) , can be reset to S surge at any time t s that a surge occurs, and thus it can accom- modate multiple such surges if recorded in the published data in [29] , what distinguishes it from the classic SIR model. The evolution of the infected population I is governed by the second  ODE  in  system  1 ,  where  a  is  the  transmission  rate  con- stant  and  b  the  removal  rate  constant.  We  can  define  the  basic effective reproductive rate R e = aS(t) /b, as the fate of the evolu- tion of the disease depends upon it. If R e is smaller than one, the infected  population  I  will  decrease  monotonically  to  zero  and  if greater than one, it will increase, i.e., if  dI(t) < 0 ⇒ R e < 1 and if dt dI(t) > 0 ⇒ R e > 1 . Thus, the effective reproductive rate R e acts as dt a threshold that determines whether an infectious disease will die out quickly or will lead to an epidemic. At the start of an epidemic, when R e  > 1 and S ≈ 1, the rate ≈ of  infected  population  is  described  by  the  approximation  dI(t) dt ( a − b ) I(t) and thus, the infected population I will initially increase exponentially according to I(t) = I(0) e (a −b) t . The infected popula- tion will reach a peak when the rate of change of the infected pop- ulation is zero, d I(t) /d t = 0 , and this occurs when R e = 1 . After the peak, the infected population will start to decrease exponentially, following I(t) ∝ e −bt . Thus, eventually (for t → ∞ ), the system will approach S → 0 and I → 0. Interestingly, the existence of a thresh- old for infection is not obvious from the recorded data, however can be discerned from the model. This is crucial in identifying a possible  second  wave  where  a  sudden  increase  in  the  suscepti- ble population S will result in R e > 1, and to another exponential growth of the number of infections I .
3. Methodology
The data in [29] for China, South Korea, India, Australia, USA, Italy  and  the  state  of  Texas  (communities)  are  organised  in  the form of time-series where the rows are recordings in time (from January to June, 2020), and the three columns are, the total cases I d tot  (first column), number of infected individuals I d  (second col- umn) and deaths D d (third column). Consequently, the number of removals can be estimated from the data by R d (2) m = I d tot − I d − D d .
removals can be estimated from the data by R d m = I d tot − I d − D d . Since we want to adjust the numerical solutions to our proposed
Since we want to adjust the numerical solutions to our proposed SIR  model  (1)  to  the  recorded  data  from  [29] ,  for  each  dataset (community),  we  consider  initial  conditions  in  the  interval  [0,1] and scale them by a scaling factor f to fit the recorded data by visual inspection. In particular, the initial conditions for the three populations are set such that S(0) = 1 (i.e., all individuals are con- sidered susceptible initially), I(0) = R m (0) = I d max / f < 1 , where I d max is the maximum number of infected individuals I d . Consequently, the  parameters  a,  b,  f  and  I d max  are  adjusted  manually  to  fit  the recorded data as best as possible, based on a trial-and-error ap- proach and visual inspections. A preliminary analysis using non- linear fittings to fit the model to the published data [29] provided at best inferior results to those obtained in this paper using our trial-and-error approach with visual inspections, in the sense that the  model  solutions  did  not  follow  as  close  the  published  data, what justifies our approach in the paper. A prime reason for this is that the published data (including those in [29] we are using here) are data from different countries that follow different methodolo- gies to record them, with not all infected individuals or deaths ac- counted for. In this context, S, I and R m  ≥ 0 at any t ≥ 0. System (1) can be solved numerically to find how the scaled (by f ) susceptible S ,
infected I and removed R m populations (what we call model solu- tions) evolve with time, in good agreement with the recorded data. In particular, since this system is simple with well-behaved solu- tions,  we  used  the  first-order  Euler  integration  method  to  solve it  numerically,  and  a  time  step  h = 20 0 / 50 0 0 = 0 . 04  that  corre- sponds  to  a  final  integration  time  t f  of  200  days  since  January, 2020.  This  amounts  to  double  the  time  interval  in  the  recorded data in [29] and allows for predictions for up to 100 days after January, 2020. Obviously,  what  is  important  when  studying  the  spread  of  a virus  is  the  number  of  deaths  D  and  recoveries  R  in  time.  As these numbers are not provided directly by the SIR model (1) , we estimated  them  by  first,  plotting  the  data  for  deaths  D d  vs  the removals  R d m ,  where  R d m = D d + R d = I d tot − I d  and  then  fitting  the plotted data with the nonlinear function (cid:2) (cid:3)
plotted data with the nonlinear function (cid:2) (cid:3) −k R m , 1 − e D = D 0
(cid:2) (cid:3) −k R m , 1 − e (3) D = D 0 where D 0 and k are constants estimated by the non-linear fitting. The  function  is  expressed  in  terms  of  only  model  values  and  is fitted to the curve of the data. Thus, having obtained D from the non-linear fitting, the number of recoveries R can be described in time by the simple observation that it is given by the scaled re- movals, R m from the SIR model (1) , less the number of deaths, D from Eq. (3) ,
4. Results
The rate of increase in the number of infections depends on the product of the number of infected and susceptible individuals. An understanding of the system of Eqs. (1) explains the staggering in- crease in the infection rate around the world. Infected people trav- eling around the world has led to the increase in infected numbers and this results in a further increase in the susceptible population [14] . This gives rise to a positive feedback loop leading to a very rapid rise in the number of active infected cases. Thus, during a surge period, the number of susceptible individuals increases and as a result, the number of infected individuals increases as well. For example, as of 1 March, 2020, there were 88,590 infected indi- viduals and by 3 April, 2020, this number had grown to a stagger- ing 1,015,877 [29] . Understanding  the  implications  of  what  the  system  of Eqs.  (1)  tells  us,  the  only  conclusion  to  be  drawn  using  scien- tific  principles  is  that  drastic  action  needs  to  be  taken  as  early as possible, while the numbers are still low, before the exponen- tial  increase  in  infections  starts  kicking  in.  For  example,  if  we consider the results of policies introduced in the UK to mitigate the spread of the disease, there were 267,240 total infections and 37,460 deaths by 27 May and in the USA, 1,755,803 and 102,107, total infections and deaths, respectively.  Thus,  even if one starts with  low  numbers  of  infected  individuals,  the  number  of  infec- tions  will  at  first  grow  slowly  and  then,  increase  approximately exponentially,  then  taper  off until  a  peak  is  reached.  Comparing these  results  for  the  UK  and  USA  with  those  for  South  Korea, where  steps  were  taken  immediately  to  reduce  the  susceptible population, there were 11,344 total infections and 269 deaths by 27 May. The number of infections in China reached a peak about 16 February, 2020. The government took extreme actions with clo- sures, confinement, social distancing, and people wearing masks. This type of action produces a decline in the number of infections and susceptible individuals. If the number of susceptible individu- als does not decrease, then the number of infections just gets in- creased rapidly. As at this moment, there is no effective vaccine developed, the only way to reduce the number of infections is to reduce the number of individuals that are susceptible to the dis-
(3)
4 I. Cooper, A. Mondal and C.G. Antonopoulos / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 139 (2020) 110057









Fig. 1.  China: Model predictions for the period from 22 January to 9 August, 2020 with data from January to June, 2020. The data show a discrete jump in deaths D in mid-April.
ease. Consequently, the rate of infection tends to zero only if the susceptible population goes to zero. Here, we have applied the SIR model (1) considering data from various countries and the state of Texas in the USA provided in [29] .  Assuming  the  published  data  are  reliable,  the  SIR  model (1) can be applied to assess the spread of the COVID-19 disease and predict the number of infected, removed and recovered pop- ulations  and  deaths  in  the  communities,  accommodating  at  the same time possible surges in the number of susceptible individ- uals. Figures 1–17 show the time evolution of the cumulative total infections I tot , current infected individuals, I , recovered individuals, R , dead individuals, D , and normalized susceptible populations, S for China, South Korea, India, Australia, USA, Italy and Texas in the USA, respectively. The crosses show the published data [29] and the  smooth  lines,  solutions  and  predictions from  the  SIR  model. The cumulative total infections plots also show a curve for the ini- tial exponential increase in the number of infections, where the number of infections doubles every five days. The figures also show predictions, and a summary of the SIR model parameters in (1) and published data in [29] for easy comparisons. We start by analysing the data from China and then move on to the study of the data from South Korea, India, Australia, USA, Italy and Texas.
4.1. China
The number of infections peaked in China about 16 February, 2020 and since then, it has slowly decreased. The decrease only occurs when the susceptible population numbers decrease and this decrease in susceptible numbers only occurred through the drastic actions taken by the Chinese government. China quarantined and
confirmed potential patients, and restricted citizens' movements as well as international travel. Social distancing was widely practiced, and most of the people wore face masks. The actual numbers of infections have decreased at a greater rate than predicted by the SIR model (see Figs. 1 and 2 ). Our results in Figs. 1 and 2 provide evidence that the Chinese government has done well in limiting the impact of the spread of COVID-19.
4.2. South Korea
From the plots shown in Figs. 3 and 4 , it is obvious that the South Korean government has done a wonderful job in controlling the spread of the virus. The country has implemented an extensive virus testing program. There has also been a heavy use of surveil- lance technology: closed-circuit television (CCTV) and tracking of bank cards and mobile phone usage, to identify who to test in the first place. South Korea has achieved a low fatality rate (currently one percent) without resorting to such authoritarian measures as in China. The most conspicuous part of the South Korean strategy is simple enough: implementation of repeated cycles of test and contact trace measures.
4.3. India
4.3. India
To match the recorded data from India with predictions from the SIR model (1) , it is necessary to include a number of surge pe- riods, as shown in Fig. 5 . This is because the SIR model cannot pre- dict accurately the peak number of infections, if the actual num- bers in the infected population have not peaked in time. It is most likely the spread of the virus as of early June, 2020 is not con- tained and there will be an increasing number of total infections.
I. Cooper, A. Mondal and C.G. Antonopoulos / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 139 (2020) 110057 5










Fig. 2.  China: (a) Nonlinear fitting with Eq. (3) using a trial-and-error method to estimate the number of deaths, D from the removed population, R m (see text for the details). (b) Plots of the number of removals, R m against the cumulative total infections I tot and current active cases I .


Fig. 3.  South Korea: Model predictions for the period from 26 February to 13 September, 2020 with data from February to June, 2020.
6 I. Cooper, A. Mondal and C.G. Antonopoulos / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 139 (2020) 110057












Fig. 4.  South Korea: (a) Nonlinear fitting with Eq. (3) using a trial-and-error method to estimate the number of deaths, D from the removed population, R m (see text for the details). (b) Plots of the number of removals, R m against the cumulative total infections I tot and current active cases I .


Fig. 5.  India: Model predictions for the period from 14 March to 30 September, 2020 with data from March to June, 2020.
However, by adding new surge periods, a higher and delayed peak can be predicted and compared with future data. In Fig. 5 , a conse- quence of the surge periods is that the peak is delayed and higher than if no surge periods were applied. The model predictions for the 30 September, 2020 including the surges are: 330,0 0 0 total in-
fections, 700 active infections and 7,500 deaths, whereas if there were  no  surge  periods,  there  would  be  130,0 0 0  total  infections, 700 active infections and 6,300 deaths, with the peak of 60,000, which is about 40% of the current number of active cases occuring around 20 May 2020. Thus, the model can still give a rough esti-
I. Cooper, A. Mondal and C.G. Antonopoulos / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 139 (2020) 110057 7










Fig. 6.  India: (a) Nonlinear fitting with Eq. (3) using a trial-and-error method to estimate the number of deaths, D from the removed population, R m (see text for the details). (b) Plots of the number of removals, R m against the cumulative total infections I tot and current active cases I .


Fig. 7.  Australia: Model predictions for the period from 22 January to 9 August, 2020 with data from January to June, 2020.
8 I. Cooper, A. Mondal and C.G. Antonopoulos / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 139 (2020) 110057












Fig. 8.  Australia: (a) Nonlinear fitting with Eq. (3) using a trial-and-error method to estimate the number of deaths, D from the removed population, R m (see text for the details). (b) Plots of the number of removals, R m against the cumulative total infections I tot and current active cases I .


Fig. 9.  USA: Model predictions for the period from 22 January to 9 August, 2020 with data from January to June, 2020.
I. Cooper, A. Mondal and C.G. Antonopoulos / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 139 (2020) 110057 9





Fig. 10.  USA: (a) Nonlinear fitting with Eq. (3) using a trial-and-error method to estimate the number of deaths, D from the removed population, R m (see text for the details). (b) Plots of the number of removals, R m against the cumulative total infections I tot and current active cases I .
mate of future infections and deaths, as well as the time it may take for the number of infections to drop to safer levels, at which time restrictions can be eased, even without an accurate prediction in the peak in active infections (see Figs. 5 and 6 ).
4.4. Australia
A  surge  in  the  susceptible  population  was  applied  in  early March, 2020 in the country. The surge was caused by 2,700 pas- sengers disembarking from the Ruby Princes cruise ship in Sydney and  then,  returning  to  their  homes  around  Australia.  More  than 750 passengers and crew have become infected and 26 died. Two government  enquires  have  been  established  to  investigate  what went wrong. Also, at this time many infected overseas passengers arrived by air from Europe and the USA. The Australian govern- ment was too slow in quarantining arrivals from overseas. From mid-March, 2020 until mid-May, 2020, the Australian gov- ernments  introduced  measures  of  testing,  contact  tracing,  social distancing, staying at home policy, closure of many businesses and encouraging people to work from home. From Figs. 7 and 8 , it can be observed that actions taken were successful as the actual num- ber  of  infections  declined  in  accord  with  the  model  predictions. There have been no further surge periods. From end of May, 2020, these restrictions are being removed in stages. The SIR model can be used when future data becomes available to see if the number of susceptible individuals starts to increase. If so, the model can accommodate this by introducing surge factors.
4.5. USA
As of early June, 2020, the peak number of infections has not been reached. When a peak in the data is not reached, it is more difficult to fit the model predictions to the data. In the model, it is
necessary to add a few surge periods. This is because new epicen- tres of the virus arose at different times. The virus started spread- ing in Washington State, followed by California, New York, Chicago and the southern states of the USA. The need to add surge periods shows clearly that the spread of the virus is not under control. In the USA, by the end of May, 2020, the number of active in- fected  cases  has  not  yet  peaked  and  the  cumulative  total  num- ber of infections keeps getting bigger. This can be accounted for in the SIR model by considering how the susceptible population changes  with  time  in  May.  During  that  time,  to  match  the  data to the model predictions, surge periods were used where the nor- malized susceptible population S was reset to 0.2 every four days. What is currently happening in the USA is that as susceptible in- dividuals become infected, their population decreases, with these infected  individuals  mixing  with  the  general  population,  leading to an increase in the susceptible population. This is shown in the model  by  the  variable  for  the  susceptible  population,  S ,  varying from about 0.06 to 0.20, repeatedly during May. Until this vicious cycle is broken, the cumulative total infected population will keep growing at a steady rate and not reach an almost steady-state. The fluctuating normalized susceptible variable provides clear evidence that government authorities do not have the spread of the virus under control (see Figs. 9 and 10 ).
4.6. Texas
4.6. Texas
The plots in Figs. 11 and 12 show that the peak in the total cumulative number of infections has not been reached as early as June, however, the peak is probably not far away. If there are no surges in the susceptible population, then one could expect that by late September, 2020, the number of infections will have fallen to very small numbers and the virus will have been well under control with the total number of deaths in the order of 2,0 0 0. In
10 I. Cooper, A. Mondal and C.G. Antonopoulos / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 139 (2020) 110057











Fig. 11.  Texas: Model predictions for the period from 12 March to 28 September, 2020 with data from March to June, 2020.


Fig. 12.  Texas: (a) Nonlinear fitting with Eq. (3) using a trial-and-error method to estimate the number of deaths, D from the removed population, R m (see text for the details). (b) Plots of the number of removals, R m against the cumulative total infections I tot and current active cases I .
mid-May, 2020, some restrictions have been lifted in the state of Texas. The SIR model can be used to model some of the possible scenarios if the early relaxation of restrictions leads to increasing number of susceptible populations. If there is a relatively small in- crease in the future number of susceptible individuals, no series impacts occur. However, if there is a large outbreak of the virus, then the impacts can be dramatic. For example, at the end of June, 2020, if S was reset to 0.8 (S = 0 . 8) , a second wave of infections occurs with the peak number of infections occurring near the end of July, with the second wave peak being higher than the initial peak  number  of  infections.  Subsequently,  the  number  of  deaths
will rise from about 2,0 0 0 to nearly 5,0 0 0, as shown in Figs. 13 and 14 . If  governments  start  lifting  their  containment  strategies  too quickly, then it is probable there will be a second wave of infec- tions with a larger peak in active cases, resulting to many more deaths.
4.7. Italy
4.7. Italy
4.7. Italy
Figure 15 shows clearly that the peak of the pandemic has been reached in Italy and without further surge periods, the spread of the  virus  is  contained  and  number  of  active  cases  is  declining
I. Cooper, A. Mondal and C.G. Antonopoulos / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 139 (2020) 110057 11

Fig. 13.  Texas: Model predictions with a surge period occurring at the end of June, 2020.

Fig. 14.  Texas: If a second wave occurs, there could be increase in the number of deaths, D .
rapidly. The plots in panels (a), (b) in Fig. 16 are a check on how well the model can predict the time evolution of the virus. These plots also assist in selecting the model's input parameters.
5. Flattening the curve
The term flattening the curve has rapidly become a rallying cry in the fight against COVID-19, popularised by the media and gov- ernment officials. Claims have been made that flattening the curve results in: (i) reduction in the peak number of cases, thereby help- ing  to  prevent  the  health  system  from  being  overwhelmed  and (ii) in an increase in the duration of the pandemic with the total burden of cases remaining the same. This implies that social dis- tancing measures and management of cases, with their devastat- ing economic and social impacts, may need to continue for much longer. The picture which has been widely shown in the media is shown in Fig. 17 (a).




The idea presented in the media as shown in Fig. 17 (a) is that by  flattening  the  curve,  the  peak  number  of  infections  will  de- crease, however, the total number of infections will be the same and the duration of the pandemic will be longer. Hence, they con- cluded that by flattening the curve , it will have a lesser impact upon the demands in hospitals. Figure 17 (b) gives the scientific meaning of flattening the curve . By governments imposing appropriate mea- sures, the number of susceptible individuals can be reduced and combined with isolating infected individuals, will reduce the peak number of infections. When this is done, it actually shortens the time the virus impacts the society. Thus, the second claim has no scientific basis and is incorrect. What is important is reducing the peak in the number of infections and when this is done, it shortens the duration in which drastic measures need to be taken and not lengthen the period as stated in the media and by government of- ficials. Figure 17 shows that the peak number of infections actually reduces the duration of the impact of the virus on a community.
6. Conclusions
6. Conclusions
Mathematical modelling theories are effective tools to deal with the time evolution and patterns of disease outbreaks. They provide us with useful predictions in the context of the impact of inter- vention in decreasing the number of infected-susceptible incidence rates [30–32] . In this work, we have augmented the classic SIR model with the ability to accommodate surges in the number of susceptible individuals, supplemented by recorded data from China, South Ko- rea, India, Australia, USA, Italy and the state of Texas in the USA to provide insights into the spread of COVID-19 in communities. In all cases, the model predictions could be fitted to the published data reasonably well, with some fits better than others. For China, the actual number of infections fell more rapidly than the model prediction, which is an indication of the success of the measures implemented by the Chinese government. There was a jump in the number of deaths reported in mid-April in China, which results in a less robust estimate of the number of deaths predicted by the SIR model. The susceptible population dropped to zero very quickly in South Korea showing that the government was quick to act in con-
12 I. Cooper, A. Mondal and C.G. Antonopoulos / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 139 (2020) 110057









Fig. 15.  Italy: Model predictions for the period from 26 February to 13 September, 2020 with data from February to June, 2020.

Fig. 16.  Italy: (a) Nonlinear fitting with Eq. (3) using a trial-and-error method to estimate the number of deaths, D from the removed population, R m (see text for the details). (b) Plots of the number of removals, R m against the cumulative total infections I tot and current active cases I .
trolling the spread of the virus. As of the beginning of June, 2020, the peak number of infections in India has not yet been reached. Therefore, the model predictions give only minimum estimates of the  duration  of  the  pandemic  in  the  country,  the  total  cumula- tive number of infections and deaths. The case study of the virus in Australia shows the importance of including a surge where the number of susceptible individuals can be increased. This surge can be linked to the arrival of infected individuals from overseas and infected people from the Ruby Princess cruise ship. The data from
USA is an interesting example, since there are multiple epicentres of the virus that arise at different times. This makes it more diffi- cult to select appropriate model parameters and surges where the susceptible population is adjusted. The results for Texas show that the  model  can  be  applied  to  communities  other  than  countries. Italy provides an example where there is excellent agreement be- tween the published data and model predictions. Thus, our SIR model provides a theoretical framework to inves- tigate the spread of the COVID-19 virus within communities. The
I. Cooper, A. Mondal and C.G. Antonopoulos / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 139 (2020) 110057 13




Fig. 17.  Flattening the curve: Panel (a): The flattening of the curve diagram used widely in the media to represent a means of reducing the impacts of COVID-19. Panel (b) If the number of susceptible individuals is reduced, then the peak number of infections will be less and the time for the number of infections to fall to low numbers is reduced.
model can give insights into the time evolution of the spread of the virus that the data alone does not. In this context, it can be applied to communities, given reliable data are available. Its power also lies to the fact that, as new data are added to the model, it is easy to adjust its parameters and provide with best-fit curves between the data and the predictions from the model. It is in this context then, it can provide with estimates of the number of likely deaths in the future and time scales for decline in the number of infections in communities. Our results show that the SIR model is more suitable to predict the epidemic trend due to the spread of the disease as it can accommodate surges and be adjusted to the recorded data. By comparing the published data with predictions, it is possible to predict the success of government interventions. The considered data are taken in between January and June, 2020 that contains the datasets before and during the implementation of strict and control measures. Our analysis also confirms the success and failures in some countries in the control measures taken. Strict,  adequate  measures  have  to  be  implemented  to  further prevent and control the spread of COVID-19. Countries around the world have taken steps to decrease the number of infected citizens, such  as  lock-down  measures,  awareness  programs  promoted  via media, hand sanitization campaigns, etc. to slow down the trans- mission of the disease. Additional measures, including early detec- tion  approaches  and  isolation  of  susceptible  individuals  to  avoid mixing  them  with  no-symptoms  and  self-quarantine  individuals, traffic  restrictions,  and  medical  treatment  have  shown  they  can help to prevent the increase in the number of infected individuals. Strong lockdown policies can be implemented, in different areas, if possible. In line with this, necessary public health policies have to be implemented in countries with high rates of COVID-19 cases as early as possible to control its spread. The SIR model used here is only a simple one and thus, the predictions that come out might not be accurate enough, something that also depends on the pub- lished data and their trustworthiness. However, as the model data show, one thing that is certain is that COVID-19 is not going to go way quickly or easily.
Declaration of Competing Interest
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing finan- cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
AM is thankful for the support provided by the Department of Mathematical  Sciences,  University  of  Essex,  UK  to  complete  this work.
References
[1] World Health organization, coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak. https:// www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019 . [2] Wu JT , Leung K , Leung GM . Nowcasting and forecasting the potential domes- tic and international spread of the 2019-ncov outbreak originating in wuhan, china: a modelling study. The Lancet 2020;395(10225):689–97 . [3] Novel coronavirus (COVID-19) cases, provided by JHU CSSE. https://github.com/ CSSEGISandData/COVID-19 . [4] Tang B , Wang X , Li Q , Bragazzi NL , Tang S , Xiao Y , Wu J . Estimation of the transmission risk of the 2019-ncov and its implication for public health inter- ventions. Journal of clinical medicine 2020;9(2):462 . [5] Kraemer MU , Yang CH , Gutierrez B , Wu CH , Klein B , Pigott DM , Brownstein JS . The effect of human mobility and control measures on the COVID-19 epidemic in china. Science 2020;36 8(64 90):4 93–7 . [6] WHO,  naming  the  coronavirus  disease  (COVID-19)  and  the  virus  that causes it. https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/ technical-guidance . [7] Song P , Wang L , Zhou Y , He J , Zhu B , Wang F , Eisenberg M . An epidemiological forecast model and software assessing interventions on COVID-19 epidemic in China. medRxiv. Epub; 2020. p. 3 . [8] Wangping J , Ke H , Yang S , Wenzhe C , Shengshu W , Shanshan Y , Miao L . Ex- tended SIR prediction of the epidemics trend of COVID-19 in italy and com- pared with hunan, china. Frontiers in Medicine 2020;7:169 . [9] Dandekar R, Barbastathis G. Quantifying the effect of quarantine control in covid-19 infectious spread using machine learning. medRxiv 2020. doi: 10.1101/ 2020.04.03.20052084 . [10] Ranjan R. Predictions for COVID-19 outbreak in india using epidemiological models. medRxiv 2020. doi: 10.1101/2020.04.02.20051466 . [11] Pulla P. Covid-19: India imposes lockdown for 21 days and cases rise 2020. doi: 10.1136/bmj.m1251 . [12] MOHFW, coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). Available online, https://www. mohfw.gov.in .
14 I. Cooper, A. Mondal and C.G. Antonopoulos / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 139 (2020) 110057
[13] Scarpino SV , Petri G . On the predictability of infectious disease outbreaks. Na- ture communications 2019;10(1):1–8 . [14] Chinazzi M , Davis JT , Ajelli M , Gioannini C , Litvinova M , Merler S , Viboud C . The effect of travel restrictions on the spread of the 2019 novel coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak. Science 2020;36 8(64 89):395–400 . [15] Rüdiger S , Plietzsch A , Sagués F , Sokolov IM , Kurths J . Epidemics with mutating infectivity on small-world networks. Scientific Reports 2020;10(1):1–11 . [16] Kucharski AJ, Russell TW, Diamond C, Liu Y, Edmunds J, Funk S, Davies N. Early dynamics of transmission and control of COVID-19: a mathematical mod- elling study. The Lancet infectious diseases 2020. doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(20) 30144-4 . [17] Yang Z , Zeng Z , Wang K , Wong SS , Liang W , Zanin M , Liang J . Modified SEIR and AI prediction of the epidemics trend of COVID-19 in china under public health interventions. Journal of Thoracic Disease 2020;12(3):165 . [18] Fanelli D , Piazza F . Analysis and forecast of COVID-19 spreading in china, italy and france. Chaos, Solitons & Fractals 2020;134:109761 . [19] Xue L , Jing S , Miller JC , Sun W , Li H , Estrada-Franco JG , Zhu H . A data-driven network model for the emerging COVID-19 epidemics in wuhan, toronto and italy. Mathematical Biosciences 2020:108391 . [20] Postnikov EB . Estimation of COVID-19 dynamics "on a back-of-envelope": Does the  simplest  SIR  model  provide  quantitative  parameters  and  predictions? Chaos, Solitons & Fractals 2020;135:109841 . [21] Li Q , Tang B , Bragazzi NL , Xiao Y , Wu J . Modeling the impact of mass influenza vaccination and public health interventions on COVID-19 epidemics with lim- ited detection capability. Mathematical Biosciences 2020:108378 . [22] Hethcote HW . Three basic epidemiological models. In Applied mathematical ecology (pp. 119-144). Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer; 1989 .
[23] Hethcote  HW .  The  mathematics  of  infectious  diseases.  SIAM  review 20 0 0;42(4):599–653 . [24] Hethcote HW . The basic epidemiology models: models, expressions for r0, pa- rameter estimation, and applications. In Mathematical understanding of infec- tious disease dynamics 2009;16:1–61 . [25] Weiss HH. The SIR model and the foundations of public health. MATerials MATemàtics,  0 0 01-17  2013 .  http://mat.uab.cat/matmat/PDFv2013/v2013n03. pdf [26] Amaro JE , Dudouet J , Orce JN . Global analysis of the COVID-19 pandemic using simple epidemiological models 2020 . ArXiv preprint arXiv:2005.06742 [27] Calafiore GC , Novara C , Possieri C . A modified sir model for the covid-19 con- tagion in Italy 2020 . ArXiv preprint arXiv:2003.14391 [28] Ndairou F , Area I , Nieto JJ , Torres DF . Mathematical modeling of covid-19 transmission dynamics with a case study of wuhan. Chaos, Solitons & Fractals 2020:109846 . [29] Coronavirus  worldometer  website. https://www.worldometers.info/ coronavirus/ . [30] Giordano  G ,  Blanchini  F ,  Bruno  R ,  Colaneri  P ,  Di  Filippo  A ,  Di  Matteo  A , Colaneri M . Modelling the COVID-19 epidemic and implementation of popu- lation-wide interventions in italy. Nature Medicine 2020:1–6 . [31] Hou C , Chen J , Zhou Y , Hua L , Yuan J , He S , Zhang J . The effectiveness of quarantine of wuhan city against the corona virus disease 2019 (COVID-19): A well-mixed SEIR model analysis. Journal of medical virology 2020 . [32] Anastassopoulou C , Russo L , Tsakris A , Siettos C . Data-based analysis, modelling and forecasting of the COVID-19 outbreak. PloS one 2020;15(3) . E0230405
"